yet another round of talks to reach a
truce in Gaza repeated attempts have so
far failed to end Israel's six-month war
on the strip with both Israel and Hamas
sticking to their positions will this
round be any different and is a deal
even possible this is Inside
[Music]
Story
hello again I'm James Bay the latest
round of negotiations on a ceasefire in
Gaza is resuming in Karo an Israeli
delegation is taking part and Hamas has
also sent Representatives after months
of talks the US President Joe Biden is
reported to have written to mediators in
Qatar and Egypt urging them to pressure
Hamas to accept a deal but the armed
group says it won't deviate from its
demand for a permanent ceasefire
something Israel has ruled out can the
two sides reach common ground this time
and what leverage do the mediators have
to secure a deal we'll discuss all of
these issues in a moment with our panel
but first this report from Victoria gon
B pressure is mounting on Israel's
government to agree to a ceasefire in
Gaza and secure the release of Israeli
captives that's as another round of
negotiations with Hamas is resuming in
Cairo this country
which is very good very strong will not
will not survive this prime
minister maybe 6 months so it is
imperative that we will be election very
very soon the Israeli government's also
under pressure from the United States US
President Joe Biden is demanding an
immediate ceasefire and he's reported to
have sent letters to mediators in katar
and Egypt urging them to pressure Hamas
to accept a deal after months of
negotiations let's not discount the
impact of Israeli military pressure that
is clearly what is helping to bring
Hamas to the table uh on the one hand
Hamas has no way out I'm sure the
Egyptians and the kares are are talking
sense to them on the other hand uh
Netanyahu really has no way out at this
point Israel's war on the besieged
population of Gaza has killed more than
33,000 people and pushed Palestinians to
the brink of famine particularly in the
northern part of the strip Hamas says it
won't deviate from its demand for a
permanent ceasefire when we are
negotiating a ceasefire it means that
the troops the Israeli troops which
invaded Gaza after October 7th has to
leave Gaza SL when we talk about this
ceasefire agreement it has to it has to
mean uh that the people after the ceas
fair agreement have to move freely
inside the Gaza Strip during the last
round of talks in Qatar Israel said it
wanted all Israeli captives released in
the first stage of a deal Hamas
indicated it would only release women
and children the two sides also disagree
about the release of Palestinian
prisoners serving life sentences in
Israeli jails the talks in Cairo could
result in some respite for Palestinians
in the strip but finding some form of
agreement between Israel and Hamas is
taking time time the people of Gaza
don't have Victoria gon B Al jazer for
Inside
[Music]
Story on this program we're aiming to
explain the obstacles to a Ceasar
agreement with our panel in ten Aviv
we've got Dan Perry he's the author of
The ask questions later blog and
newsletter on the substack platform in
occupied East Jerusalem munia nusa is a
professor of international law at Al
koods University and in Ciro haa halawa
is a political consultant and
non-resident fellow at the Middle East
Institute thank you all three for
joining us all three of you let me start
with a very quick question to each of
you which is how optimistic you are
about the chances of a deal haa what do
you think are the chances that they
could get a deal this time in the city
where you are
Caro uh very briefly I'm uh I'm not
optimistic I don't think much of the
parameters around a hostage deal have
really changed nor have the uh the sort
of entrenched positions on on both sides
in that regard Dan your thoughts on this
do you think there is a chance of a deal
here I think Hamas wants a deal where
Israel pulls out of Gaza essentially
capitulates in exchange for all the
hostages and the chances of that are
extremely small whether they can do a
partial hostage release or temporary
ceasefire is entirely up to I you mun
your thoughts at the start of the
discussion about how optimistic you are
there could be a deal unfortunately I'm
not very optimistic because I think the
cap the Gap is quite big between both uh
uh parties uh the Israelis have set
really huge uh goals uh for this uh
genocide and uh and I think that if you
know they don't want to stop it right
now okay well we start from a pretty
pessimistic Place having heard all of
your initial views on this Hava let's
let's first look at uh the mechanics of
this who is attending we have the CIA
director we have the Prime Minister and
foreign minister of Qatar we have the
intelligence chief of Egypt and we
believe we have the mosad chief and the
shinb uh Chief and then also um you're
going to have a senior representative of
Hamas who won't I don't think be in the
same room as the others but all of these
people have been negotiating for a long
time they all know each other pretty
well
now indeed we've had rounds and rounds
of these talks and I think part of what
the challenge is uh particularly for
those sort of non-combatant sides not
the Israelis nor Hamas is that the the
terms the parameters of the deals simply
don't change uh hamas's asks remain the
same Israel's asks remain the same and
that daylight that Gap that Monir very
rightly pointed out between the two
sides hasn't diminished in fact if
anything it's entrenching on on both
sides and we've reached the point where
there is very little uh
understanding of who and how these two
parties can meet in the middle to engage
in in a in a ceasefire Arrangement and a
host hostage for prisoner exchange deal
that would allow for significant rest
bite in this conflict or at least and
even possibly leave us to a more
permanent uh state of ceasefire where we
can rebuild some of the aid
infrastructure in Gazza uh reinstitute
and reconstitute un activities there as
well uh because they are the only major
Aid delivery mechanism and really begin
to try and help uh the millions of
people that are stuck there in in in
Gaza and do important recovery as well
as return hostages and have prisoners
released to their families Dan just
staying with the mechanics of this just
for a moment so we can explain it to our
viewers we have a senior Hamas official
Hal ala who is in Cairo for these talks
but my understanding you'll Pro probably
know more about this these are indirect
talks Israel and Hamas don't sit in the
same room the mediators the Egyptian
mediators and Kat mediators go between
the Israelis and Hamas is that explain
to us how how you think it works yeah I
mean is yes Israel and Hamas will not
sit in the same room and it's all a
little bit silly and farsal and I think
this is one case where both sides are
equally to blame uh but but that's okay
I mean I don't think that this is a
dynamic where the Israelis and hamnik by
sitting in the same room we're going to
develop some sort of camaraderie and
that will help the negotiations so the
Egyptians uh and Americans uh uh cies
for their Pirates as well and throughout
these talks have done great work and
Incredibly important work now I I agree
with the other panelists uh the asks on
both sides simply haven't changed uh and
you you you need to look at what the
parameters are the variables are and
figure out where there might be some
potential for movement um I I I can only
repeat what I said before a partial uh
hostage release for a temporary
ceasefire seems to be uh all that we can
hope for I know that the Israelis would
agree to this I'm pretty sure um and and
perhaps more pressures needed by katar
and Egypt on Hamas uh to do the same I I
I don't see another way out now there
are other variables including uh does
Israel insist on Security checks of the
people that they let out of Rafa to go
back North to hanun Gaza City uh they
insist on it I don't think they're going
to give up on them so I I
I'm not terribly optimistic for these
reasons on the other hand there is a lot
of pressure on the Israelis to uh the
Israeli government uh from within Israel
to find some way to do a deal that is
true that is true uh and indeed there
has been talk of Netanyahu not giving
enough of a mandate uh to the trio of
senior people he has there the head of
the shet head of the mad and it's not
alone a general who could e have been a
chief of staff and under a slightly
different scenario so these are very
serious people and um Ehud Barack
yesterday the former prime minister on
television urged that they be given a
true mandate to come up with the best
deal that is uh attainable and to bring
that back to the government uh for
approval or rejection without the
government
micromanaging uh and there is of course
in the background here because of the
Myriad skull duggies swirling around
Netanyahu suspicion and even more a
suspicion that um he is trying to drag
his feet and to play for time uh for his
own political purposes and I don't
discount that may be true but but as I
look at the actual variables of the
situation uh what I see is that as I
said the
conceivable transition solution to a
permanent ceas fire runs through uh uh a
gamut that requires pressure on Hamas in
this case and not Israel okay
um you you've heard there that um Dan
has talked about some of the parameters
for a deal let's run through some of the
things that have been discussed because
I mean we're not getting a running
commentary on any of this but we're
getting leaks repeatedly and some of the
things come up repeatedly um a six week
Ceasar is what we hear uh and then a
phased release of those that are being
held by Hamas and other groups um and
we're talking apparently about the
feemale fale sick and elderly captives
being released first is that your
understanding of of of the first part of
the deal um I don't know actually what
is going to be the first part of the
deal but what I know for sure is that we
as a I'm part of the Palestinian civil
society and what I would say is no
matter how many phases this deal is
going to take what is very important is
that it ends with the ceasefire the
ceasefire is certainly the answer to to
uh and and and is the only way that the
genocide can stop this has been cleared
by uh um you know understanding the way
and the language of the international
court of justice uh um measures
provisional measures this is also clear
from uh the security Council resolution
that also called for a ceasefire so the
ceasefire is certainly a necessity in
order just to interrupt there the
question is the timing of the Ceasar the
security Council resolution
actually refers to a ceas fart during
Ramadan as and as you know Ramadan is
running out it'll be over in a few days
uh the Israelis seem to be offering a
six week Ceasar or certainly that's been
offered in the negotiations by either
the Israelis uh or the US side Hamas are
saying a permanent ceasefire what is the
point you're making what what do you
think Palestinian people are
demanding certainly permanent Seas fire
Gaza has been destroyed and people to
return back to their homes we've we've
exper experienced the temporary uh poses
of fighting H during the first exchanges
of prisoners and we saw that Israel
during that period uh prevented
Palestinians from returning to Gaza City
and to the north of Gaza City not only
to go back to their homes to live but
even to go and pick up some stuff in
order to go back to the South with more
of their stuff later on Israel destroyed
and burned more and more houses and more
and more facilities in the north of the
Gaza Strip what we see now as
Palestinian Civil Society is that what
Israel is doing is that it is emptying
the north of Gaza totally from its
residence this is totally dangerous if
uh poses are only happening for the
exchanges so that the fighting will
return be later on um in order to
completely destroy the Gaza Strip and
completely displace the Palestinians who
continue to live in the Gaza Strip as it
has been cleared to be the plan of the
Israelis that has not been even hidden
it has been you know published and
talked about it within with within
Israeli media uh this is something that
is not acceptable we
as Dan sorry you want Dan Dan wanted to
pick you up on something there Dan well
I mean that is not the Israeli point the
Israelis one need not over complicate
there is no big conspiracy theory Israel
wants Hamas to be deposed in Gaza that's
what they want and they want the H back
there's no plan to depopulate Gaza
although some extremists in Israel have
been have published their wishful
thinking that way no that's not the plan
I would ask you munir do you want would
you agree as a Palestinian to a
permanent ceasefire that changes nothing
from the current status quo meaning it
leaves Hamas in charge in Gaza is that
for you and Israel pulls out Hamas is in
charge depleted the minut but in charge
you would be happy with this with these
do you have an answer to his question
and then I'm going to continue answering
the
questions uh Palestinian leadership
should be only chosen by Palestinians
and not by by anybody else not the
Israelis and not anybody else in the
world however what I want is that Israel
pulls out immediately of the Gaza Strip
I want life to return back to the Gaza
Strip Israel has destroyed the Gaza
Strip in a way way and has continued
with genocide that not only the uh court
has found plausible but also the special
rur on occupied Palestinian territory
has said that it is actually happening
the genocide I mean there is all the
evidence in the world that there is a
genocide I want the genocide to stop now
this is the most
important that we have as Palestinians
please stop the genocide you know the
genocide definition of genocide
definition of genocide is not a lot of
people died definition of genocide is
that there was an intent to destroy a
people or a religious group and that is
Nott these are important questions these
are important questions Dan but they're
not the questions that we are we're
looking at a possible we're looking at a
possible deal in Caro so Dan let me ask
you this question um in terms of the
Israeli side obviously there's so much
pressure on prime minister Netanyahu to
get the people that are being held by
Hamas to get them free and we don't know
they're all held by held by Hamas um
give us your understanding of how many
people Israel believe are alive at this
stage they believe they have a pretty
good idea um and they believe that over
half are alive how much over half I'm
not sure they know there are some they
know are dead some they think they know
are alive and there's a gray Zone in
between but
certainly a good number of them are no
longer alive and yeah there's huge
pressure on nanahu you have to remember
that Netanyahu is an unpopular prime
minister uh 75% of the Israelis in all
the polls say they want new elections
very soon and they want them gone uh
two-thirds roughly appear to be ready to
vote for parties that are not in the
current Coalition if you remove the H
Ultra Orthodox religious extremist
parties from the equation because
they're automatically on his side the
numbers I just mentioned tell you that
of the others including Israeli Arabs
90% wanted gone so that's a kind of
pressure he's under but on the other
hand it's not a presidential system it's
parliamentary and uh in a parliamentary
system you might think that a disgraced
government that is failed
catastrophically uh and and is clearly
unpopular would resign
but technically speaking as long as the
63 uh uh highly obedient Coalition uh uh
members that he has voting for him in
the 120 seat Parliament stick with him
he can he can things out until 2026 but
the pressure is mounting and the US
plays an enormous role here because the
US has leverage over isra and the US by
the way has presented something really
really interesting that may be a a a way
out of this sort of Highly tactical
discussion here of who is released what
week there's something bigger going on
the US is proposing that Israel stop
playing games in a way that it's playing
games and agree to the Palestinian
Authority returning agree something that
Israel itself has been demanding since
2007 agree perhaps to multinational
force and Arab force in Gaza uh agree to
talks that could last a long time on a
two-state solution and in return be part
of a Sunni moderates uh Western us NATO
umbrella uh in the region an alliance
against Iran and it's
and let me let me bring in haa on all
this because um we're talking about the
Cairo talks those are all things that
are being floated by the US they are not
things I would have thought that are
going to be in the scope of the
discussion of what's going on around
that table in Ciro are they well
actually well let's hear let's hear h on
this I I think the you know the talks
have been going on for so long James
that everything is kind of blending into
itself and such as the lack of movement
that with every round of talks we get a
new proposed peace plan and and and Dan
is not necessarily incorrect about what
has been suggested and what has been
thrown at at a collection of the
regional uh partners and states I think
it's um it is uh it is perceived
certainly as incredibly demeaning and
condescending to have the United States
and Israel concoct plans shop them to
Arab leaders and tell them that these
are the only options at their disposal
that is certainly how the Public's
perceive them whether or not leaders uh
from from as far as you know from from
Egypt across to the UAE want to
entertain those that will be their own
uh prerogative and they will face and
they are facing their own forms of
accountability and challenges
domestically at home however the the
primary the primary purpose of why all
of this begins to blend in is because
there is real um acknowledgement at
least I think that there cannot be a
ceas fire Arrangement until there is or
at least in terms of the permanent
ceasefire Arrangement until there is
some kind of uh resolution on the
question of the day after and what that
looks like and there is a fundamental
refusal and a fervent Arab public
refusal to see Israel militarily occupy
uh indefinitely the Gaza Strip and uh
either condemn Palestinians to
uninhabitable conditions and unlivable
conditions that nobody would wish upon
themselves in Raf in kanun for those who
remain in GDA City and other parts or
offer them this long held belief that
any other Arab Nation can simply take
them and should take them and this
constant push pull over the Sinai border
or other parts of the region that can or
should and beyond that who governs Gaza
how is Gaza governed is inherently a
part of these ceasefire talks these
ideas about Arab multinational forces
and stuff you know we know that these
are serious ious plans being taken very
seriously by the Americans they were
shocked part of the reason blinkin was
across the region uh just uh 10 days ago
two weeks ago was to shop this exact
plan to the Arab State leaders uh the
Egyptians the jordanians the Saudis and
the qataris and the emiratis who were
all in Cairo or maybe the kataris
weren't I can't remember but uh but the
point being is that there is this
unrealistic expectation or unrealistic
uh understanding of how this conflict is
playing out in the region not just Visa
gazans themselves but looking further
Beyond to occupied East Jerusalem to
occupied West Bank the continuing
dispossession I think Dan is mistaken to
say that this is merely a uh a question
about Hamas and a question about the
Gaza Strip there is a wider opportunism
at play regarding annexation and
regarding occupation that is continuing
such that b uh netan and his allies
would like to wait this out as long as
possible I think the only uh shift in
this discourse and dynamic will come
dependent on what the Iranian response
is to the bombing of their Embassy in
Damascus a few days ago and it's been
made uh certainly from what we
understand clear that the Iranians will
strike and will strike in retaliation
and the Americans seem to be wanting to
take a step back and uh and avoid any
direct us Iran confront ation now
whether the broader risks of of regional
configration things we've talked about
James for over a year sorry for over six
months in terms of the risks uh of this
roding out into a wider Regional
confrontation now seek to become reality
or now start to be put into motion and
that slows down the military effort in
the Gaza Strip and gives us a de facto
uh lessening of the uh of the conflict
uh dynamic but nevertheless increased
urgency on the humanitarian landscape is
one possible scenario that would allow a
delay of ceasefire talks or would
encourage maybe the Israelis and even
Hamas to delay such talks as they beyond
the region if I can bring you in to
comment on the developments of the last
couple of days we're told there was a
very tense phone call between Biden and
Netanyahu where he put real pressure um
on the Israeli leader also you've got
these promises from the Israelis that
they're going to reopen The era's
Crossing they're going to have a
temporary use of the port in ashdod how
are these seen as Palestinian by
Palestinians and are they seen as
related in any way to these Cairo talks
I mean diplomats talk about confidence
building measures but m in my experience
Israel prefers to use sticks rather than
carrots yes but it's also Israel that is
now starting to see carrots and sticks
by the rest of the world uh two days ago
only the Human Rights Council uh in
Geneva the United Nations Human Rights
Council uh issued a resolution calling
for states to uh not to export arms and
weapons to Israel and this is very
important they also created a mechanism
to see who is exporting weapons to
Israel this is also following the
findings of the international court of
justice looking at Israel as a state
that is plausibly conducting genocide
side in addition to all the other
evidence that we have we have a very
active legal work not only against
Israel but also against countries that
are complicit with Israel in the next
few days you will we will all witness
the Nicaragua versus Germany case in the
international court of justice which
actually blames Germany for exporting
weapons to Israel while Israel is
conducting genocide this is actually a
lot of pressure not only on Israel but
also on the United States and on all the
countries that have been complicit in
the Israeli genocide in the Gaza Strip
so this is very significant in my
opinion it does apply pressure not only
on Israel but also on the countries that
are supporting Israel and this means
that they will apply their own pressure
on Israel now you can see there are
several parliaments around the world
that are calling their states to stop
sending weapons to
Israel let me just bring in Dan towards
the end of our discussion now Dan on the
Press pressure on Israel because on
prime minister Netanyahu there's
internal pressure as well huge protests
taking place um across Israeli cities
particularly in Tel Aviv and the body
recovered of one of those that was being
held uh in Gaza how much pressure is the
Israeli Prime Minister under and do you
think that in any way plays into the
talks in
Cairo pressure on him is really uh from
public opinion that might at some point
reach the break point with his Coalition
that could happen he's generally
unpopular he was unpopular before
October 7th because of his effort to
putine the country but I think mon
you're sort of looking at the wrong tree
if not marking up the wrong tree uh the
icj is highly political and has no
enforcement mechanism they can say what
they want this is not a genocide the
Human Rights Council of of the United
Nations is a bit of a joke generally run
by dictatorships that don't respect
human rights no one pays attention the
real pressure points on Israel are
something you alluded to at the end
which is Canada uh effectively uh
slapping arms embargo talk of such a
thing by some people in uh in uh Britain
and particularly the letter by 36
Senators this week calling on uh Biden
to put the squeeze on nanyu which he did
but it won't go the way that my
panelists are talking about what Biden
uh and the West want uh is for nanahu to
say yes to the deal that by the way H
was not concocted by Israel the us
because Israel opposes it but by the US
in the west and that deal might create
real pressure on Israel if Israeli
Society sees that any offing uh is this
Grand Design that includes peace with
Saudi Arabia then the pressure on
Netanyahu to succumb to hamas's terms
might become irresistible but even then
I doubt it and in any negotiation you
have to know it's important to the other
side you want to convince Israel of
anything you have to know what's
important to them now Netanyahu is nahu
and he is a global historic Singularity
but to the people of Israel there's
pretty much consensus that they cannot
have Hamas in charge in Gaza anymore
because Hamas spokesman go on Arab
television and say we're going to do
October 7th again and again and again it
ended the discussion so Israel needs to
know that Hamas will be replaced by the
PA n may not want this but that's what's
going to happen anyway if it is if there
a structure is created to enable that so
honestly if I was katar and EGP eypt and
any Arab of good faith and any human
being of good faith I would be maximally
pressuring Hamas to stand down and
accept an exile deal where they go
wherever hopefully Kar can okay some
some pretty controversial comments there
I'm afraid we don't have time to pick
you up on them though thanks to all our
guests Dan Perry munia mber and Hala haa
halawa whatever the outcome of the
latest Ciro talks we'll cover it here on
Al jazer and to watch us at any time you
can always go to our mobile app or to
our website al.com we always want to
hear from you your comments are welcome
on our Facebook page that's facebook.com
AJ insidestory or find us on X where
we're at AJ insid story I'm James Bay
and I'll be back again here very soon
from all the team on the program please
stay safe bye-bye for
[Music]
now